README.md, before:

# Holz, the Standard Logger

Holz is a logging library for those situations where you want fast, simple,
and extensible.

It's smaller and faster than pretty much anything out there.


## Motivation

There's a lot of loggers out there. Bunyan, Winston, Pino, log4js, ye old
console.log. None of them scratched my itch:

* Fast
* Built for Node
* Simple, readable code
* Only one dependency ([`fast-safe-stringify`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/fast-safe-stringify))
* TypeScript, and fully type-checked
* Child loggers with fields
* Custom and dynamic base objects
* Custom log levels (w/ type checking)
* Custom per-field formatters
* Custom output functions
* Custom level and message keys
* No `v` (version), `hostname`, or `pid` fields by default; you can add them
  if you wish, but I don't need or want them. Create your own logger factory
  with `fields` set if you need 'em.
* No extra cruft: No syslog, no file rotation, no stream management; just logging, stupid

## Use

```javascript
import { createLogger } from 'holz'

const logger = createLogger()
logger.info('boo!')
// stdout: {"level":"info","msg":"boo!"}

logger.child({ user: "user1" }).warn({ a: 1 }, "oh hi %s!", "john")
// stdout: {"level":"warn","a":1,"msg":"oh hi john!"}

logger.error(new Error("Oh no!"))
// stdout: {"level":"error","error":{"message":"Oh no!","stack":"...",...}}
```

Simple.

### `createLogger`

Creates a logger object. Due to TypeScript constraints, you'll want to use
this function to create a logger that has the appropriate types. The
options struct looks like this, in kinda-typescript:

```javascript
type CreateLoggerOpts = {
  // A structure of level name -> level number, like { info: 20, warn: 30 }
  // if this isn't provided, it defaults to bunyan/pino standard levels
  // of { trace: 10, debug: 20, info: 30, warn: 40, error: 50, fatal: 60 }
  levels: { [k: string]: number }

  // The current minimum log level
  // Optional if `levels` is not provided; defaults to 'info'
  // Required if `levels` is provided to set the default log level
  level: keyof levels | number

  // Optional: a function to generate the base payload object dynamically
  base: () => Fields

  // Optional: static base fields, will be applied on top of the dynamic object
  fields: Fields

  // Optional: Key in the payload that will receive the current log level,
  // defaults to 'level'
  levelKey: string

  // Whether the numeric or string level will be put in the key, defaults to 'string'
  levelOutput: 'string' | 'number'

  // Key in the payload that will receive the log message; defaults to 'msg'
  messageKey: string

  // Optional: A function that will be called to format the message if there are
  // any trailing parameters after the message; otherwise, this fn will not
  // be called.
  format: (msg: string, ...args: unknown[]) => string

  // Optional: A function that will be called if there is an object passed before
  // the message parameter when logging, to transform that object into something
  // a bit more useful (like enumerating the fields in an error).
  transform: (o: object) => object

  // Optional: Transformations to apply to individual fields in the payload,
  // replacing the value of given keys by the result of the supplied function
  fieldTransforms: { [k in string | number]: (value: unknown, key: string) => unknown }

  // Optional: Function that outputs a log line; defaults to writing JSON to stdout
  output: (s: Payload) => void
}
```

When you call `createLogger`, you definitely want to use a literal option struct
so that you get TypeScript typechecking for the per-level methods attached to
the resulting logger. For example, this works fine:

```javascript
const logger = createLogger({
  levels: {
    info: 50,
    error: 100
  },
  level: 'info',
})
// Works fine; key retried from `levels` def'n
logger.info(...)
```

But this does not:

```javascript
const logOpts: any = {
  levels: {
    info: 50
  },
  level: 'info'
}
// Probably a typescript error:
const logger = createLogger(logOpts)
// Definitely a TypeScript error:
logger.info(...) // `info` not defined
})
```

Also, don't use the keys `child` or `setLevel` or `_log` as log levels,
cuz that will cause problems when the logging methods are assigned to
the logger.

### Methods on the logger

The logger has two public predefined methods on it: `child` and `setLevel`.

#### `Logger#child`

This is pretty simple, it has the signature:

```javascript
Logger#child(fields, opts)
```

Where `fields` are fields that will be applied to all messages logged
through the child. These are merged with the parent logger's fields.
`opts` is basically the same as the logger options except:

1. `fields` can't be set (because that's what `fields` argument is, silly)
1. `levels` can't be set -- they're locked in place from the parent logger
1. `fieldTransforms` are merged with the parent field transforms
1. `base` overrides the parent's `base` (has no merging logic)

All other fields can be set and work as expected.

#### `Logger#setLevel`

This method allows you to set the log level:

```javascript
Logger#setLevel(level: string | number)
```

If you provide a string, it had better be one of the keys of the logger's
configured `levels`, otherwise this function will go boom. If you provide a
number, that will work directly as the _minimum_ log level (all numeric values
equal or higher will be printed, all lower will not be printed).

#### The dynamic log methods

The logger sets up some dynamic logging methods based upon the `levels` you
provide. So if you use the default levels, the logger will have `trace`, `debug`,
`info`, `warn`, `error` and `fatal` on it.

These functions will all have the same signature:

```javascript
(msg: string, ...fmtArgs: unknown[]) => void
(obj: object, msg?: string, ...fmtArgs: unknown[]) => void
```

Building up the logging payload looks like this:

1. First, the `levelKey` property is set on the payload, with either the string
   or numeric level, depending on the `levelOutput` setting
1. Then the result of `base()` (if set) is merged in
1. Then the logger's `fields` are merged in
1. Then, if the first parameter to the log message is an object,
   that object is passed through `transform`; the result is merged
   into the payload
1. Then the `messageKey` property is set on the payload; if no `fmtArgs` are
   provided, then simply the `msg` is used, otherwise the message key is set
   to the results of `format(msg, ...fmtArgs)`. The default `format` function
   is `util.format`, which allows for printf-style printing.
1. Then, if there are any field transforms, these are applied to each matching
   named field
1. Then two non-enumerable symbol fields are set containing the original
   numeric and string levels (see `levelStringSym` and `levelNumberSym` exports)
   for processing of downstream output, if you need.

Finally, after all of that, the message payload is passed to the `output`
function.

This whole process has a whole lot of `try`/`catch` around everything, so
it should never blow up. Since the primary purpose of logging is to get
information out of a system, the log method tries to do its best to
output the data you've provided, through all the transforms you've provided,
and will generally fall back to sane defaults (e.g., untransformed fields)
if it encounters errors.

#### The defaults

A few defaults are provided out of the box. These are:

##### Default `format` function

printf-style msg formatting is provided by Node's
[util.format](https://nodejs.org/api/util.html#util_util_format_format_args).

##### Default `output` function

That looks like this:

```javascript
export const safeStringify = (o: Payload) => {
  try {
    return JSON.stringify(o)
  } catch (_) {
    return fastSafeStringify(o)
  }
}

export const defaultOutput =
  (p: Payload) => process.stdout.write(safeStringify(p) + "\n")
```

If you want to use your own, you can re-import `safeStringify` from
this lib to access that dependency.

##### Default `transform` function

That looks like this:

```javascript
export const defaultTransform = transformError
```

`transformError` basically takes any Error-alike object (has a `.stack`
property), and makes it into something a bit more palatable to
`JSON.stringify`. (It also unwinds the error `cause` if you're using
[verrors](https://github.com/joyent/node-verror).)

You can import `transformError` if you like and build your own transform
function -- like maybe detecting and formatting HTTP Request/Response objects.
Since Error logging is the only thing that is a greatest-common-denominator
across all use-cases, it's the only thing intended to be supported here.

##### Default `levels`

These follow the Bunyan/Pino defaults:

```javascript
export const defaultLevels = {
  trace: 10,
  debug: 20,
  info: 30,
  warn: 40,
  error: 50,
  fatal: 60,
} as const
```

##### Default `levelOutput`

Like so:

```javascript
export const defaultLevelOutput = 'string' as const
```

##### Default `levelKey`

As you might expect, the default key used on the payload output to contain
log-level information is:

```javascript
export const defaultLevelKey = 'level'
```

Or maybe you expected `severity`. Oops.


##### Default `messageKey`

Okay:

```javascript
export const defaultMessageKey = 'msg'
```

##### Default `level`

```javascript
export const defaultLevel = defaultLevels['info']
```

##### Default `fieldTransforms`

```javascript
export const defaultFieldTransforms = {
  err: transformError,
  error: transformError,
}
```

Again, as a greatest-common-denominator.

### Creating your own logger factory

The easiest thing to do is to simply provide some defaults to `createLogger`.
Otherwise, to get the correct type-checking, you'll need to mix together the
`BaseLogger` class with the `LogMethods` type to get your proper type
checking. Check out how `createLogger` works to see that in action.

## I want microbenchmarks:

Sure ok, synchronous streaming to /dev/null, if you care about that sort of
thing:

```
Basic suite:
benchBole*10000: 316.986ms
benchBunyan*10000: 773.702ms
benchWinston*10000: 661.043ms
benchPino*10000: 327.702ms
benchHolz*10000: 296.616ms
benchBole*10000: 283.773ms
benchBunyan*10000: 757.361ms
benchWinston*10000: 583.192ms
benchPino*10000: 312.009ms
benchHolz*10000: 290.921ms

Child logger suite:
benchBunyan*10000: 802.076ms
benchWinston*10000: 808.245ms
benchPino*10000: 353.756ms
benchHolz*10000: 377.896ms
benchBunyan*10000: 829.824ms
benchWinston*10000: 736.329ms
benchPino*10000: 322.725ms
benchHolz*10000: 353.784ms

Child-child logger suite:
benchBunyan*10000: 918.099ms
benchWinston*10000: 1.033s
benchPino*10000: 664.097ms
benchHolz*10000: 483.97ms
benchBunyan*10000: 951.717ms
benchWinston*10000: 1.049s
benchPino*10000: 652.031ms
benchHolz*10000: 463.56ms

Dynamic child logger suite:
benchBunyan*10000: 1.098s
benchWinston*10000: 962.139ms
benchPino*10000: 712.427ms
benchHolz*10000: 472.344ms
benchBunyan*10000: 1.107s
benchWinston*10000: 965.001ms
benchPino*10000: 747.214ms
benchHolz*10000: 479.462ms

Dynamic child-child logger suite:
benchBunyan*10000: 1.461s
benchWinston*10000: 1.972s
benchPino*10000: 4.851s
benchHolz*10000: 707.452ms
benchBunyan*10000: 1.487s
benchWinston*10000: 2.003s
benchPino*10000: 4.938s
benchHolz*10000: 734.01ms
```

Commit message:

fix: Add more tests, fix some bugs, bump 1.1

README.md, after:

# Holz, a fast, minimal TypeScript logger

Holz is a logging library for those situations where you want fast, simple,
and extensible.

It's smaller and faster than pretty much anything out there.


## Motivation

There's a lot of loggers out there. Bunyan, Winston, Pino, log4js, ye old
console.log. None of them scratched my itch:

* Fast
* Built for Node
* Simple, readable code
* Only one dependency ([`safe-json-stringify`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/safe-json-stringify))
* TypeScript, and fully type-checked
* Child loggers with fields
* Custom and dynamic base objects
* Custom log levels (w/ type checking)
* Custom per-field formatters
* Custom output functions
* Custom level and message keys
* No `v` (version), `hostname`, or `pid` fields by default; you can add them
  if you wish, but I don't need or want them. Create your own logger factory
  with `fields` set if you need 'em.
* No extra cruft: No syslog, no file rotation, no stream management; just logging, stupid

## Use

```javascript
import { createLogger } from 'holz'

const logger = createLogger()
logger.info('boo!')
// stdout: {"level":"info","msg":"boo!"}

logger.child({ user: "user1" }).warn({ a: 1 }, "oh hi %s!", "john")
// stdout: {"level":"warn","a":1,"msg":"oh hi john!"}

logger.error(new Error("Oh no!"))
// stdout: {"level":"error","error":{"message":"Oh no!","stack":"...",...}}
```

Simple.

### `createLogger`

Creates a logger object. Due to TypeScript constraints, you'll want to use
this function to create a logger that has the appropriate types. The
options struct looks like this, in kinda-typescript:

```javascript
type CreateLoggerOpts = {
  // A structure of level name -> level number, like { info: 20, warn: 30 }
  // if this isn't provided, it defaults to bunyan/pino standard levels
  // of { trace: 10, debug: 20, info: 30, warn: 40, error: 50, fatal: 60 }
  levels: { [k: string]: number }

  // The current minimum log level
  // Optional if `levels` is not provided; defaults to 'info'
  // Required if `levels` is provided to set the default log level
  level: keyof levels | number

  // Optional: a function to generate the base payload object dynamically
  base: () => Fields

  // Optional: static base fields, will be applied on top of the dynamic object
  fields: Fields

  // Optional: Key in the payload that will receive the current log level,
  // defaults to 'level'
  levelKey: string

  // Whether the numeric or string level will be put in the key, defaults to 'string'
  levelOutput: 'string' | 'number'

  // Key in the payload that will receive the log message; defaults to 'msg'
  messageKey: string

  // Optional: A function that will be called to format the message if there are
  // any trailing parameters after the message; otherwise, this fn will not
  // be called.
  format: (msg: string, ...args: unknown[]) => string

  // Optional: A function that will be called if there is an object passed before
  // the message parameter when logging, to transform that object into something
  // a bit more useful (like enumerating the fields in an error).
  transform: (o: object) => object

  // Optional: Transformations to apply to individual fields in the payload,
  // replacing the value of given keys by the result of the supplied function
  fieldTransforms: { [k in string | number]: (value: unknown, key: string) => unknown }

  // Optional: Function that outputs a log line; defaults to writing JSON to stdout
  output: (s: Payload) => void
}
```

When you call `createLogger`, you definitely want to use a literal option struct
so that you get TypeScript typechecking for the per-level methods attached to
the resulting logger. For example, this works fine:

```javascript
const logger = createLogger({
  levels: {
    info: 50,
    error: 100
  },
  level: 'info',
})
// Works fine; key retrieved from `levels` def'n
logger.info(...)
```

But this does not:

```javascript
const logOpts: any = {
  levels: {
    info: 50
  },
  level: 'info'
}
// Probably a typescript error:
const logger = createLogger(logOpts)
// Definitely a TypeScript error:
logger.info(...) // `info` not defined
})
```

Also, don't use the keys `child` or `setLevel` or `_log` as log levels,
because that will cause problems when the logging methods are assigned to
the logger.

### Methods on the logger

The logger has two public predefined methods on it: `child` and `setLevel`.

#### `Logger#child`

This is pretty simple, it has the signature:

```javascript
Logger#child(fields, opts)
```

Where `fields` are fields that will be applied to all messages logged
through the child. These are merged with the parent logger's fields.
`opts` is basically the same as the logger options except:

1. `fields` can't be set (because that's what `fields` argument is, silly)
1. `levels` can't be set -- they're locked in place from the parent logger
1. `fieldTransforms` are merged with the parent field transforms
1. `base` overrides the parent's `base` (has no merging logic)

All other fields can be set and work as expected.

#### `Logger#setLevel`

This method allows you to set the log level:

```javascript
Logger#setLevel(level: string | number)
```

If you provide a string, it had better be one of the keys of the logger's
configured `levels`, otherwise this function will go boom. If you provide a
number, that will work directly as the _minimum_ log level (all numeric values
equal or higher will be printed, all lower will not be printed).

#### The dynamic log methods

The logger sets up some dynamic logging methods based upon the `levels` you
provide. So if you use the default levels, the logger will have `trace`, `debug`,
`info`, `warn`, `error` and `fatal` on it.

These functions will all have the same signature:

```javascript
(msg: string, ...fmtArgs: unknown[]) => void
(obj: object, msg?: string, ...fmtArgs: unknown[]) => void
```

Building up the logging payload looks like this:

1. First, the `levelKey` property is set on the payload, with either the string
   or numeric level, depending on the `levelOutput` setting
1. Then the result of `base()` (if set) is merged in
1. Then the logger's `fields` are merged in
1. Then, if the first parameter to the log message is an object,
   that object is passed through `transform`; the result is merged
   into the payload
1. Then the `messageKey` property is set on the payload; if no `fmtArgs` are
   provided, then simply the `msg` is used, otherwise the message key is set
   to the results of `format(msg, ...fmtArgs)`. The default `format` function
   is `util.format`, which allows for printf-style printing.
1. Then, if there are any field transforms, these are applied to each matching
   named field
1. Then two non-enumerable symbol fields are set containing the original
   numeric and string levels (see `levelStringSym` and `levelNumberSym` exports)
   for processing of downstream output, if you need.

Finally, after all of that, the message payload is passed to the `output`
function.

This whole process has a whole lot of `try`/`catch` around everything, so
it should never blow up. Since the primary purpose of logging is to get
information out of a system, the log method tries to do its best to
output the data you've provided, through all the transforms you've provided,
and will generally fall back to sane defaults (e.g., untransformed fields)
if it encounters errors.

#### The defaults

A few defaults are provided out of the box. These are:

##### Default `format` function

printf-style msg formatting is provided by Node's
[util.format](https://nodejs.org/api/util.html#util_util_format_format_args).

##### Default `output` function

That looks like this:

```javascript
export const safeStringify = (o: Payload) => {
  try {
    return JSON.stringify(o)
  } catch (_) {
    return fastSafeStringify(o)
  }
}

export const defaultOutput =
  (p: Payload) => process.stdout.write(safeStringify(p) + "\n")
```

If you want to use your own, you can re-import `safeStringify` from
this lib to access that dependency.

##### Default `transform` function

That looks like this:

```javascript
export function defaultTransform(o: object) {
  return o instanceof Error ? { error: transformError(o) } : o
}
```

`transformError` basically takes any Error-alike object (has a `.stack`
property), and makes it into something a bit more palatable to
`JSON.stringify`. (It also unwinds the error `cause` if you're using
[verrors](https://github.com/joyent/node-verror).)

You can import `transformError` if you like and build your own transform
function -- like maybe detecting and formatting HTTP Request/Response objects.
Since Error logging is the only thing that is a greatest-common-denominator
across all use-cases, it's the only thing intended to be supported here.

##### Default `levels`

These follow the Bunyan/Pino defaults:

```javascript
export const defaultLevels = {
  trace: 10,
  debug: 20,
  info: 30,
  warn: 40,
  error: 50,
  fatal: 60,
} as const
```

##### Default `levelOutput`

Like so:

```javascript
export const defaultLevelOutput = 'string' as const
```

This means the default is that the level information (attached to the `levelKey`)
field, is outputted as a string. Like `'info'` or `'error'`.

##### Default `levelKey`

As you might expect, the default key used on the payload output to contain
log-level information is:

```javascript
export const defaultLevelKey = 'level'
```

Or maybe you expected `severity`. Oops.


##### Default `messageKey`

What field on the payload object receives the provided message (if any):

```javascript
export const defaultMessageKey = 'msg'
```

##### Default `level`

```javascript
export const defaultLevel = defaultLevels['info']
```

The default log level is `'info'`.

##### Default `fieldTransforms`

```javascript
export const defaultFieldTransforms = {
  err: transformError,
  error: transformError,
}
```

Again, as a greatest-common-denominator, we provide some field transforms on
`err` and `error` to help capture stack traces, etc.

### Creating your own logger factory

The easiest thing to do is to simply provide some defaults to `createLogger`.
Otherwise, to get the correct type-checking, you'll need to mix together the
`BaseLogger` class with the `LogMethods` type to get your proper type
checking. Check out how `createLogger` works to see that in action.

## I want microbenchmarks:

Sure ok, synchronous streaming to /dev/null, if you care about that sort of
thing:

```
Basic suite:
benchBole*10000: 316.986ms
benchBunyan*10000: 773.702ms
benchWinston*10000: 661.043ms
benchPino*10000: 327.702ms
benchHolz*10000: 296.616ms
benchBole*10000: 283.773ms
benchBunyan*10000: 757.361ms
benchWinston*10000: 583.192ms
benchPino*10000: 312.009ms
benchHolz*10000: 290.921ms

Child logger suite:
benchBunyan*10000: 802.076ms
benchWinston*10000: 808.245ms
benchPino*10000: 353.756ms
benchHolz*10000: 377.896ms
benchBunyan*10000: 829.824ms
benchWinston*10000: 736.329ms
benchPino*10000: 322.725ms
benchHolz*10000: 353.784ms

Child-child logger suite:
benchBunyan*10000: 918.099ms
benchWinston*10000: 1.033s
benchPino*10000: 664.097ms
benchHolz*10000: 483.97ms
benchBunyan*10000: 951.717ms
benchWinston*10000: 1.049s
benchPino*10000: 652.031ms
benchHolz*10000: 463.56ms

Dynamic child logger suite:
benchBunyan*10000: 1.098s
benchWinston*10000: 962.139ms
benchPino*10000: 712.427ms
benchHolz*10000: 472.344ms
benchBunyan*10000: 1.107s
benchWinston*10000: 965.001ms
benchPino*10000: 747.214ms
benchHolz*10000: 479.462ms

Dynamic child-child logger suite:
benchBunyan*10000: 1.461s
benchWinston*10000: 1.972s
benchPino*10000: 4.851s
benchHolz*10000: 707.452ms
benchBunyan*10000: 1.487s
benchWinston*10000: 2.003s
benchPino*10000: 4.938s
benchHolz*10000: 734.01ms
```
